I come to you today to speak of liars
lawsuits and laughter the first time I
heard about Holocaust denial I laughed
Holocaust denial the Holocaust which has
the dubious distinction of being the
best documented genocide in the world
who could believe it didn't happen think
about it
four deniers to be right who would have
to be wrong well first of all the
victims the survivors who have told us
their harrowing stories who else would
have to be wrong the bystanders the
people who lived in the myriads of towns
and villages and cities on the Eastern
Front who watched their neighbors be
rounded up
men women children young old and be
marched to the outskirts of the town to
be shot and left dead in ditches or the
poles who lived in towns or villages
around the death camps who watched day
after day as the trains went in fold
with people and came out empty but above
all who would have to be wronged
the perpetrators the people who say we
did it I did it
now maybe they add a caveat they say I
didn't have a choice I was forced to do
it but nonetheless they said I did it
think about it in not one war crimes
trial since the end of world war two has
a perpetrator of any nationality ever
said it didn't happen again they may
have said I was forced but never that it
didn't happen
having thought that through I decided
denial was not going to be on my agenda
I had bigger things to worry about
right about to research and I moved on
fast forward a little over a decade and
two senior scholars scholars of the
Holocaust two most prominent historians
of the Holocaust approached me and said
Debra let's have coffee we have a
research idea that we think is perfect
for you intrigued and flattered that
they came to me with an idea and thought
me worthy of it is what is it
and they said Holocaust denial and for
the second time I left Holocaust denial
the Flat Earth folks the Elvis is alive
people I should study them and these two
guys said yeah we're intrigued what are
they about what's their objective how do
they manage to get people to believe
what they say so thinking if they
thought it was worthwhile I would take a
momentary diversion maybe a year maybe
two three maybe even four in academic
terms that's momentary we worked very
slowly and I would look at them so I did
I did my research and I came up with a
number of things two of which I'd like
to share with you today one deniers are
wolves in sheep's clothing they are the
same Nazis neo-nazis you can decide
whether you want to put a neo there or
not but when I looked at them I didn't
see any SS like uniforms swastika like
symbols on the wall Sieg Heil salutes
none of that what I found instead were
people parading as respectable academics
what did they have they had an institute
an Institute for historical review they
had a journal a SLIC Journal a journal
of historical review one
filled with papers footnote platon
papers and they had a new name not
neo-nazis not anti-semites revisionists
they said we are revisionist we are out
to do one thing to revise mistakes in
history but all you had to do was go one
inch below the surface and what did you
find there
the same adulation of Hitler praise of
the third riot anti-semitism racism
prejudice this is what intrigued me
it was anti-semitism racism prejudice
parading as rational discourse the other
thing I found many of us have been
taught to think there are facts and
their opinions
after studying deniers I think
differently there are facts there are
opinions and their lives and what
deniers want to do is take their lives
dress them up as opinions may be edgy
opinions may be sort of out-of-the-box
opinions but then if their opinions they
should be part of a conversation and
then they encroach on the facts I
published my work the book was published
and eyeing the Holocaust the growing
assault on truth the memory came out in
many different countries including here
in penguin UK and I was done with those
folks and ready to move on then came the
letter from penguin UK and for the third
time I laughed mistakenly I opened the
letter and it informed me that David
Irving was bringing a libel suit against
me in the United Kingdom for calling him
a Holocaust denier David Irving suing me
who was David Irving David Irving was a
writer of historical works most of them
about World War two and virtually all of
those works took the position
that the Nazis were really not so bad
and the Allies were really not so good
and the Jews what ever happened to them
they sort of deserved it
he knew the documents he knew the facts
but he somehow twisted them to get this
opinion he hadn't always been a
Holocaust denier but in the late 80s he
embraced it with great vigor the reason
I left also was this was a man who not
only was a Holocaust denier but seemed
quite proud of it
here was a man and I quote who said I'm
going to sink the battleship outfits
here was a man who pointed to the number
tattooed on a survivors arm and said how
much money have you made from having
that number tattooed on your arm here
was a man who said more people died in
Senator Kennedy's car at Chappaquiddick
than died in gas chambers at Auschwitz
it's an American reference but you can
look it up this was not a man who seemed
at all ashamed or reticent about being a
Holocaust denier now lots of my academic
colleagues counseled me Deborah just
ignore it when I explained you can't
just ignore a libel suit they said who's
gonna believe him anyway but here was
the problem British law but the onus put
the burden of proof on me to prove the
truth of what I said
in contrast US as it would have been in
the United States and in many other
countries on him to prove the falsehood
what did that mean that meant if I
didn't fight he would win by default
and if he won by default he could then
legitimately say my David Irving version
of the Holocaust is a legitimate version
Deborah Lipstadt was found to have live
with me when she called me a Holocaust
denier it's so fact though I David
Irving I'm not a Holocaust denier and
what is that version there was no plan
to murder the
Jews there were no gas chambers there
were no mass shootings Hitler had
nothing to do with any suffering that
went on and the Jews have made this all
up to get money from Germany and to get
a state and they've done it with the aid
and abet ins
the Allies they've planted the documents
implanted the evidence I couldn't let
that stand and ever faced a survivor or
a child of survivors I couldn't let that
stand and consider myself a responsible
historian so we fought and for those of
you who haven't seen denial hit spoiler
alert we won the judge found David
Irving to be a liar a racist and
anti-semite his view of history was
tenacious he lied he distorted and most
importantly he did it deliberately
we showed a pattern in over 25 different
major instances not small things many of
us in this audience write books are
writing books we always make mistakes
that's why we're glad to have second
editions correct the mistakes but these
always moved in the same direction blame
the Jews exonerate the Nazis but how did
we win what we did is follow his
footnotes back to his sources and what
did we find not in most cases and not in
the preponderance of cases but in every
single instance where he made some
reference to the Holocaust that his
supposed evidence was distorted
half-truth date changed sequence changed
someone put in a meeting who wasn't
there in other words he didn't have the
evidence his evidence didn't prove it we
didn't prove
what happened we proved that what he
said happened and by extension all
deniers because he either quotes them or
they get their arguments from him is not
true they what they claim they don't
have the evidence to prove it so why is
my story more than just the story of a
quirky long six-year difficult lawsuit
an American professor being declared
being dragged into a courtroom by a man
that the court declared in its judgment
was a neo-nazi polemicist what message
does it have I think in the context of
the question of truth it has a very
significant message because today as we
well know truth and facts are under
assault social media for all the gifts
it has given us has also allowed the
difference between facts established
facts and lies to be flattened third of
all extremism it's you may not see Ku
Klux Klan robes you may not see burning
crosses you may not have been here
outright white supremacist language it
may go by names all tri-national fronts
pick your names but underneath it's that
same extremism that I found in Holocaust
denial parading as rational discourse we
live in an age where truth is on the
defensive I'm reminded of a New Yorker
cartoon a quiz show recently appeared in
The New Yorker where the host of the
quiz show is saying to one of the
contestants yes ma'am you had the right
answer but your opponent yelled more
loudly than you did so he gets the point
what can we do first of all we cannot be
beguiled by rational appearances we've
got to look underneath and we will find
there the extremism second of all
we must understand that truth is not
relative number three we must go on the
offensive
not the defensive when someone makes an
outrageous claim even though they may
hold one of the highest offices in the
land if not the world we must say to
them where's the proof where's the
evidence we must hold their feet to the
fire
we must not treat it as if their lives
are the same as the facts and as I said
earlier truth is not relative many of us
have grown up in the world of the
Academy an enlightened liberal thought
where we're taught everything is open to
debate but that's not the case there are
certain things that are true there are
indisputable facts objective truth
Galileo taught it to us centuries ago
even after being forced to recant by the
Vatican that the earth moved around the
Sun he came out and what is he reported
to have said and yet it still moves the
earth is not flat the climate is
changing Elvis is not alive and most
importantly truth and facts are under
assault the job ahead of us the task
ahead of us the challenge ahead of us is
great the time to fight is short we must
act now later we'll be too late thank
you very much
you